# DS5500---Forest-Fire-Prediction

## Motivation

Uncontrolled fires that burn forests pose a great threat to the environment and wildlife of the habitat as they cause disruption of transportation, communication, and water supply. Approximately 60% of such fires occur naturally and the rest are due to human activities. It is of paramount importance to address this problem as wildfires not only deteriorate the air quality but also the natural ecosystem. The dataset contains 12 feature variables such as Temperature, Rain, Fire Weather Index(FWI), Moisture etc. using which we propose to build machine learning models that can predict the area of forest cover that would be affected. These models help reduce such hazardous effects and thereby alert wildlife departments to strategize disaster management activities in advance. Previously implemented projects have used Decision Tree and XGBoost regressors for this problem and we wish to improve models’ performance using hyperparameter tuning and ensemble/multi-task techniques. Of the models built, the one with the highest performance will be used to build an application. The application will be able to return the expected area of forest fire given the input features.

## Impact

Wildfires result in the loss of crops, and animals, as well as a decline in overall air quality. Statistical models analyze the shifting trends in a region's forest fire activity. Satellite-based methodologies often incur more time and space, and so our historical data-based predictive modeling consumes significantly less cost of maintenance and time. Our supervised ML-based approach would be useful as it can provide a dynamic and highly time-sensitive solution to Wildfire Disaster Management to take effective measures before a fire might break out. Our use of state-of-the-art ML models like XGBoost integrated with a user-friendly end-to-end application would be a need of the hour as it can aid rapid communications and on-spot decision-making. This project aims to create an interactive fire spread simulation and a risk map of the wildfire to assist Forest Fire Control Departments.
